------------------------------

Message: 3
Date: Wed, 22 Mar 2006 21:14:47 -0600
From: "Dave A. Chakrabarti" <dave@ctcnetchicago.org>
Subject: [DDN] Why Moodle could revolutionize how CTCs work
To: The Digital Divide Network discussion group
	<digitaldivide@milhouse.edc.org>
Message-ID: <442212A7.8050203@ctcnetchicago.org>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=ISO-8859-1; format=flowed

Hi all,

I sat down and took some time to look at Moodle today. For those of you 
who don't know, Moodle is a free, open sourced program that's designed 
to allow a website to offer online courses, just like Blackboard or 
Chalk. It has an impressive number of features, including the ability to 
manage massive numbers of students, instructors, and courses, and seems 
to offer full email -> forum integration (something I haven't managed to 
get working in Drupal yet, annoyingly enough).

Why should you care?

I think Moodle could revolutionize efforts to bridge the Digital Divide. 
If it's truly as easy to use as it seems (and I've seen nothing to 
contradict this assumption so far), then this is a package that *any* 
community technology organization could, and should, be using.

Consider this: say we have a group of 50 community technology groups 
across a city. One of them has a staff member who's skilled in search 
engine optimization, but the organization desperately needs some help in 
developing a sustainability plan. Another may have good fundraising 
efforts in place, but offers only basic computer literacy courses...and 
doesn't know where to send their students when they ask for more 
involved instruction, for example in website design. A third 
organization has a wealth of experience in community outreach and 
development and holds advanced classes in digital video editing, but 
lacks the capacity for developing basic literacy courses for ESL 
populations.

What I'm describing is pretty much the status quo of the community 
technology field. We have tremendous resources in our network, of which 
knowledge is perhaps the most important. We also suffer from serious 
drawbacks, since very few organizations have a perfect mastery of every 
area needed for a successful program.

If these organizations had a centralized online system for coursework, 
however, we can see some major potential for change in this model. 
Consider an organization that is considering adding a website 
development course to their offerings. How much easier would it be to 
implement if this organization could simply have a staff member take an 
online course in website development and then in teaching website 
development, while offering the same online website development course 
to students in a lab, with the newly trained staff member as a course 
instructor / facilitator? Instead of developing their own curriculum, 
they'd have access to curricula developed by several experienced 
organizations to draw from. Similarly, their staff members would go from 
having relatively few opportunities for professional development to 
having multiple courses available to them at any given time, on a 
variety of topics. Courses can also be controlled, so participation can 
be limited to members affiliated with a partner institution, or those 
who've paid a sliding scale fee, for example. In the event of a highly 
successful program, courses could even be provided for corporate or 
other participants willing to pay commercial rates for training, which 
would be a welcome stream of income. Courses could be used as-is, or 
used as the basis for a classroom course in a specific area...for 
example, a CTC in Dhaka could use a course on website development as an 
accompaniment to a classroom course taught in Bangla on the same subject.

This has implications for how we conduct our workshops and training 
sessions, too. If I'm leading a panel discussion on search engine 
optimization, for example, I can reach a fairly limited audience. How 
many more people can I reach if I've developed that same content into an 
online course, which any participating institution can make available to 
its members? How many organizations are thinking "sure, we could use a 
staff member training in search engine optimization, but we can't 
justify the staff time to send someone out during the day" ...but would 
gladly have staff members participating if the workshop were online, 
self-scheduled?

As organizations in the field of education, our network is in a position 
to benefit from Moodle in a big way, both in terms of directly working 
with our constituencies and in professional development for staff and 
volunteers. We need systems like this in place to really establish our 
work as a field, and to begin to tap the potential already hiding in 
various pockets of our network.

Anyone using Moodle already? Other ideas, comments, suggestions?

   Dave.

-------------------
Dave A. Chakrabarti
Projects Coordinator
CTCNet Chicago
dave@ctcnetchicago.org
(708) 919 1026
-------------------